Welcome to Cinema Summary, ladies and gentlemen.
Now let me tell you a story about 2
stinking rats crawling around
South Boston’s criminal underworld.
Ya get me? Okay.
Because this The Departed
So the movie takes place in Boston, where
we follow Collin Sullivan.
Who we meet initially as a boy, who is sort
of brought up by this guy, Frank Costello,
a real piece of work and all around Irish-American
mobster.
Someone you really don’t want to mess with.
When Collin gets old enough he studies at
the police academy.
But he’s not the only one studying here:
This is Billy Castigan Jr.
and both of them graduate and become officers of the law.
But suspiciously, our boy Collin has still
got ties with Frank
even as he becomes a detective.
But then again, so does Billy.
Because the thing about Billy is that his family – his uncle and father – were in with the Irish mob
But him? He’s trying to get away from it all.
But that doesn’t stop people giving him a hard time when
he tries to apply for a State Trooper position
Why are you pretending to be a cop?
As Sergeant Dignam over here is very keen to supply
As opposed to Collin, whose warmly welcomed
to the Special Investigations Unit, whose
sole mission is to bring down the Costello
crime empire.
Collin is an investigator.
Whereas Billy has a different gig that's much more difficult
He is an undercover cop.
and with a 'colorful' family background and a false
conviction here.
He’s the perfect undercover agent, willing
to go the whole nine yards of being in prison
in order to bring down Frank's empire
When he finally gets out he tries to get in
good with the criminal element.
Whereas Collin’s cushy investigation has him
trying to figure out where a bunch of microchips
are being transported around Boston by Frank,
and in the office, he starts a little romance with
Madolyn, a police psychologist.
Whereas Billy is more or less fortunate, having
a run in with Frank who rightfully suspects
Billy of being an undercover cop.
"Are you still a cop!?"
"NO!"
But Billy manages to get him off his back.
Or at least his arm.
and gets close to working with Frank and his inner ring
although his investigation is redirected to focus on
some microchips that Frank is selling to China.
The same microchips that Collin is investigating,
who just so happens to be heading
his own subunit of the SIU
He got promoted, which is good for a snake
in the grass, like Collin.
But it’s after having a session with Madolyn
(and a potential invitation to a cup of coffee),
that Billy finds out from Dignam that Frank
has a mole in the SIU.
Speaking of Collin, he’s going in with the
SIU to do a sting operation on the microchips,
Frank is trying to sell.
With Collin’s team standing by for Captain
Queenan’s inside man (a.k.a. Billy)
to give them a call to green light the operation.
If they do this right: It’ll be a huge hit
against Frank Costello.
Though that might be problem since Collin is here,
and he warns Frank that the cops are onto him.
Explicitly telling him to turn off their cellphones.
But that’s the not the only problem, the
FBI is in on this operation
but they screwed up! their
surveillance cameras have a blindspot.
They cannot see the actual transaction of
microchips and with Frank’s men having their
cellphones turned off, Billy can’t make
a call.
But he can send a text, telling Queenan, the
buyer of the microchips is there.
But that’s all they can do and the trade
goes off without a hitch.
But now, Collin and Billy both know that a
mole exists.
That Frank has a spy in the SIU and that Queenan
has a spy in Frank’s inner ring.
What they don’t know is who the mole is.
With Billy himself finding out from 'someone',
that Costello is a protected FBI informant.
Which is why he never gets busted: Costello
gives up information to the FBI about criminals
and they make sure he stay on the streets
and not in jail.
It’s intel that Billy gives to Queenan
as soon as he can.
Though its after this, that Billy is called
in by Mr. French, an associate of Frank’s,
to write down his real name, his social security,
his bank account, and license numbers.
Collin is tasked with smoking out the mole
in SIU and that night, Billy goes after Frank,
trying to get back the envelope full
of his personal information.
Frank gives Collin the envelopes and
Collin leaves with Billy in pursuit.
Though by the end of the night neither of them know
who the mole is and after being unable to
find any info on any of Frank’s crew.
Collin has Queenan followed to a meeting with
Billy
and calls up Frank’s guys to take them out.
But Queenan distracts them long enough to
get Billy out of there only to wind up dead.
Thrown out of a window
When Frank’s guys try to escape, they're fired upon by
the cops who were tailing Queenan who manage
to hit Delahunt, one of Frank’s guys.
and now with Queenan dead, everything that he had on
him is stored into evidence including his cellphone
used to contact Billy.
and Collin tries to get Billy to come in,
TRYING to smoke out the mole
but that doesn’t work and as he reads Queenan’s diary
he finds out that Frank is an informant for the FBI.
Something that Billy found out earlier and later
that night, on then news, it’s revealed
that Delahunt was an FBI informant.
and it’s sometime after that, the cops track
Frank to a coke drop off (with Billy’s help)
and a shootout ensues with Frank almost escaping
before getting gunned down by Collin after
Frank admits that he’s an FBI informant to Collin
So Collin’s a big hero for killing Frank Costello
Whoop-de-do! Big hero!
and when he get’s back, Billy’s waiting for him at his office
Wanting to have his identity given back to
him
But when he sees the envelopes that Frank gave to Collin
on Collin’s desk, he runs away,
realizing that Collin is Frank's rat
And realizing that Billy now knows this, Collin
deletes his police record.
Billy goes to Madolyn to give her an envelope
that she keeps hidden, before she reveals
to Collin that she’s pregnant (with Collin
unaware she had an affair with Billy);
Remember that invitation to some 'coffee' earlier?
It paid off.
it's later however that Collin catches her listening
to a CD from Billy that has a recording of
Collin’s conversations with Frank on it.
So, Collin calls Billy who reveals that Frank
recorded all of their conversations and that
Frank’s lawyer was supposed to give
this whole collection of CDs to Billy.
Who will use it to get Collin arrested unless
he gives Billy his identity back, and they
agree to meet where Queenan died.
Where Billy handcuffs Collin, intending to
arrest him although Trooper Brown shows up,
drawing his gun.
As Billy explains that Collin was Frank’s
rat and asks Brown why he didn’t bring Dignam,
it's a question Brown doesn’t answer (or maybe he can't)
So Billy takes Collin down in the elevator
where as soon as it opens: Trooper Barrigan
shoots Billy dead and then he shoots
Trooper Brown when he comes down.
Guess what?
Trooper Barrigan is also another one of Frank’s moles.
But it don't end well for Barrigan because uh... Collin just shoots him.
Who frames Barrigan for Billy and Brown's murder
It’s after Billy’s funeral that Collin
returns home to find former Sergeant Dignam
waiting for him who avenges Captain Queenan and Billy
With a clean shot to the head.
Good riddance.
So that ending was a little abrupt, kind of came out of nowhere, and was a very ambiguous
and you can interpret it in 1 of 2 ways
#1) You can interpret it as Dignam
being another one of Frank's moles
who was cleaning house and tying up loose ends in order to cover his own butt. Which makes sense
since Trooper Barrigan does say
"What you thought you were the
only mole in the police force?"
So there's some evidence to back up this interpretation
but there's a more simpler explanation and that is:
Former Sergeant Dignam avenging the deaths of Captain Queenan and of course!
Billy Castigan Jr., after he found
out that Collin was the mole
as to what I believe?
I subscribe to the second interpretation,
that sometime after Billy's death, he received that envelope from Madolyn
which has some evidence or has something that
reveals Collin's status as a mole
and after reading "this", he then takes matters
into his own hands and takes out Collin
and that last shot with the rat on the windowsill, is a little
reference to the fact that wherever you go in this movie
There's always gonna be someone
keeping secrets and telling lies
like police and criminals, and men and women. With
women like Madolyn and Gwen Costello (Frank's wife)
Now Madolyn is a liar, she outright tells a lie
to Collin that he is the father of her baby
When in fact, it's actually Billy and we
know this from 3 points of evidence. #1
it's been established that Collin has
some "trouble" performing in bed.
#2. There's a sex scene with Madolyn and
Billy and sometime after that scene is
when she confirms that she's pregnant.
So there's a chronology to it
And thirdly, after receiving the conversations that Collin had with Frank. She says to Collin's face
"And I thought I was the only liar."
Pretty irrefutable evidence, don't ya think?
which brings me to Gwen Costello, Frank's wife, that woman in the background whose always... "there"
Especially when Frank is having a very important conversation with someone on the phone.
There's always these shots that linger on her in the background, where she's listening in,
doing her own thing. Now I'm not saying 100% that she's some sort of rat or mole or spy...
but it really raises a few eyebrows as to what she's hiding and who she's listening in for.
Maybe it's for another mob, an Irish mob, or an Italian mob, maybe even another branch of the federal police
Like the FBI, who knows. But that's
just my theory, what do you guys think?
Was Billy the father of Madolyn's child, and
was Gwen a 'mole' or was she hiding something?
Let me know with a comment down below
with that being said thank you so much for watching ladies and gentlemen
If you enjoyed it leave a like down below and subscribe
to get updated on my latest uploads
Until next time! Go Red Sox.... I guess